Docs: How to version UI extensions (#1521)
grafana/plugin-tools: docusaurus/docs/how-to-guides/ui-extensions/versioning-extensions.md

---
id: versioning-extensions
title: Version extensions
description: This document covers best practices for versioning UI extensions, ensuring stability, compatibility, and smooth transitions.
keywords:
  - grafana
  - plugins
  - plugin
  - extensions
  - ui-extensions
sidebar_position: 40
---

# Best Practices for versioning UI Extensions

> To ensure stability and smooth transitions when updating UI extensions, we recommend using a **version suffix** in the extension point/component ID. This approach helps maintain compatibility while allowing developers to introduce breaking changes in a controlled manner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To ensure stability and smooth transitions when updating UI extensions, use a _version suffix_ in the extension point (that is, the component ID). This approach helps maintain compatibility while allowing developers to introduce breaking changes in a controlled manner.
```

## 1. **Use a Version Suffix in the Extension Point ID**

> Each **extension point ID** should include a suffix indicating the major version of the extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each extension point ID should include a suffix indicating the major version of the extension.
```

**Example:**

```typescript
// Initial version
export const EXTENSION_POINT_OR_COMPONENT_ID = 'my-plugin-id/feature/v1';

// Breaking change introduced
export const EXTENSION_POINT_OR_COMPONENT_ID_V2 = 'my-plugin-id/feature/v2';
```

> - Non-breaking changes (e.g., adding optional properties) **do not** require a new version suffix.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Non-breaking changes (for example, adding optional properties) _do not_ require a new version suffix.
```

> - Breaking changes (e.g., modifying behaviors or removing properties) **must** introduce a new version suffix.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Breaking changes (for example, modifying behaviors or removing properties) _must_ introduce a new version suffix.
```

> ## 2. **Support Multiple Versions During Transition**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 2. **Support multiple versions during transition**
```

> When introducing a new major version, the application should serve **both** the old and new versions **for a transition period**. This allows consumers time to migrate without immediate disruptions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When introducing a new major version, the application should serve both the old and new versions for a transition period. This allows consumers time to migrate without immediate disruptions.
```

**Example:**

- `my-plugin-id/feature/v1` continues to function while `my-plugin-id/feature/v2` is introduced.
- Consumers gradually migrate to `v2`.

> - After a deprecation period, `v1` can be safely removed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- After a deprecation period, `v1` you can safely remove it. 
```

Reviewer 2: This no longer makes sense after changing to fit style guidelines. Perhaps "After a deprecation period, you can safely remove `v1`."?

> - After a deprecation period, `v1` can be safely removed.

Reviewer: This doc refers to the plugin creator setting an adequate deprecation period. Do we want to suggest something specific?

Author: hmm, it is really hard to suggest something here because it depends on how many plugins consumes the extension point. If there are few the deprecation period can be shorter but if there are many it would need to be longer.

Author: It also depends on how easy it is to migrate from the old to the new version.

Reviewer 2: Agree it would be nice to set a guideline, but also with Marcus that there are too many variables for this to be realistic

## 3. **Publish Types with Version Suffixes**

> To support consuming multiple versions simultaneously, **publish types to `@grafana/plugin-types` using the same version suffix**. This allows developers to import types from different versions without conflicts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To support consuming multiple versions simultaneously, publish types to `@grafana/plugin-types` using the same version suffix. This allows developers to import types from different versions without conflicts.
```

**Example:**

```typescript
import { FeatureContextV1 } from '@grafana/plugin-types/my-plugin-id';
import { FeatureContextV2 } from '@grafana/plugin-types/my-plugin-id';
```

- Ensures type safety when working with different extension versions.
- Avoids breaking existing consumers when introducing changes.

> ## 4. **Clearly Communicate Deprecations**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 4. **Clearly communicate deprecations**
```

Deprecation should be clearly communicated to consumers to ensure a smooth transition.

> - **Use the `@deprecated` keyword** in published types and reference the changelog or migration guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Use the `@deprecated` keyword in published types and reference the changelog or migration guide.
```

  **Example:**

  ```typescript
  /**
   * @deprecated Use FeatureConfigV2 instead. See migration guide: https://example.com/migration-guide
   */
  export type FeatureContextV1 = {
    /* ... */
  };
  ```

> - **Document changes** in a **changelog** or migration guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Document changes in a changelog or migration guide.
```

> - **Provide a timeline** for deprecating older versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Provide a timeline for deprecating older versions.
```

> - **Notify consumers** of upcoming changes to prevent unexpected breakages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Notify consumers of upcoming changes to prevent unexpected breakages.
```

---
id: versioning-extensions
title: Version extensions
description: This document covers best practices for versioning UI extensions, ensuring stability, compatibility, and smooth transitions.
keywords:
  - grafana
  - plugins
  - plugin
  - extensions
  - ui-extensions
sidebar_position: 40
---

> # Best Practices for versioning UI Extensions

Reviewer 2: nit for consistency

To ensure stability and smooth transitions when updating UI extensions, use a _version suffix_ in the extension point (that is, the component ID). This approach helps maintain compatibility while allowing developers to introduce breaking changes in a controlled manner.

## 1. **Use a Version Suffix in the ID**

Each extension point ID/component ID should include a suffix indicating the major version of the extension.

> **Example:**

Author: So I started on this and it gets a bit complex to include it in the docs. I will create an issue adding it to examples (not sure I will have time before parental leave) and then reference that example in this doc. Sounds ok?

> **Example:**

Reviewer 2: @mckn yes that works - maybe link the issue here so we have a record of it then resolve the comment :)

```typescript
// Initial version
export const EXTENSION_POINT_OR_COMPONENT_ID_V1 = 'my-plugin-id/feature/v1';

// Breaking change introduced
export const EXTENSION_POINT_OR_COMPONENT_ID_V2 = 'my-plugin-id/feature/v2';
```

- Non-breaking changes (for example, adding optional properties) _do not_ require a new version suffix.
- Breaking changes (for example, modifying behaviors or removing properties) _must_ introduce a new version suffix.

## 2. **Support multiple versions during transition**

When introducing a new major version, the application should serve both the old and new versions for a transition period. This allows consumers time to migrate without immediate disruptions.

**Example:**

- `my-plugin-id/feature/v1` continues to function while `my-plugin-id/feature/v2` is introduced.
- Consumers gradually migrate to `v2`.
- After a deprecation period, `v1` you can safely remove it.

> ## 3. **Publish Types with Version Suffixes**

Author: @jackw @leventebalogh is it too early to mention the `@grafana/plugin-types` package?

Reviewer 3: No I think it's the perfect time to start mentioning it. We need to add Levitate somewhere in the mix to prevent breaking changes in the NPM package but other than that I see no reason to hold off. We want plugin devs to start using the package.

> To support consuming multiple versions simultaneously, publish types to `@grafana/plugin-types` using the same version suffix. This allows developers to import types from different versions without conflicts.

Reviewer 3: We should probably note that this only works for plugins within the `grafana` github org as of now. We should also probably mention not to point `src/module.{ts,tsx}` at the types bundler otherwise it could expose internal types without the authors knowledge.

Reviewer 2: Given this, should we move this to an optional section at the bottom with a note that it is for Grafana developers? Having it as step 3/4 in a list implies this must be done by everyone

Author: Sounds good 👍🏻  I will update the PR accordingly.

---
id: versioning-extensions
title: Version extensions
description: This document covers best practices for versioning UI extensions, ensuring stability, compatibility, and smooth transitions.
keywords:
  - grafana
  - plugins
  - plugin
  - extensions
  - ui-extensions
sidebar_position: 40
---

# Best practices for versioning UI extensions

> To ensure stability and smooth transitions when updating UI extensions, use a _version suffix_ in the ID of the extension point or exposed component. This approach helps maintain compatibility while allowing developers to introduce breaking changes in a controlled manner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To maintain stability and ensure smooth transitions when updating UI extensions, include a _version suffix_ in the ID of the extension point or exposed component. This practice preserves compatibility while allowing developers to manage breaking changes in a controlled way.
```
